Online meeting June 13th 2019 on CakeML Semantics in Coq
--------------------------------------------------------

- TJ Barclay (barclata)
- Elias Castegren
- Arthur Charguéraud (charguer)
- Armaël Guéneau (Armael)
- Quentin Ladeveze (qladeveze)


Semantics
=========

- The reference semantics appears to be the functional big step semantics in Lem.

- Lem needs to be fixed to be able to translate this functional big-step semantics.

- From Lem definition, we could generate both HOL and Coq (and others).
   Rather than using this Coq definition directly to build up proofs,
   it would probably make sense to state a clean Coq semantics,
   more idiomatic, and more robust to change in Lem's output.

   + It would make sense for us to have a relational big step semantics.
   + What is the form of the equivalence theorem that needs to be established?


- Will the reference semantics always remain a computable, functional one,
   or could a relational (clocked) semantics and/or a non-computable
   semantics in Lem be one day the reference?

   + Open question for CakeML developers.


- Do we need the Coq semantics to be able to compute in Coq?
   If not, numerous simplications are possible.
   If yes, then I would suggest replacing all the "eq_dec" stuff with
   boolean functions.

  + So far, we have no need for an executable semantics in Coq.
    Indeed, we just relate that semantics to other things.
    The goal is to go through cakeml compiler in the end.
  + One execption would be testing, if we want to gain confidence about
    the cross-system equivalence (i.e. the correctness of Lem) via testing.
    Not so much of a priority.


- Why does the evaluator return a list of results for values but not for
   exceptions? The relational semantics does not need to return lists, does it?

  + Not clear. Is it just a presentation artefact?


Coq tricks
==========

-  Are we happy targeting Coq extended with classical axioms?

   + Yes, it makes sense, because we want to be in sync with a HOL semantics.


   Is there any interest in making all definitions constructive?

   + Does not seem of interest.

- Does the semantics need to be parameterized by "ffi" throughout, or could
   we make this "ffi" stuff be a functor argument? Syntax would benefit.

   + Or parameterized by a typeclass instances, perhaps?
   + It seems that the point is to be able to consider local pieces of state, then combine them.
   + Are SL triple parameterized by the ffi state?
   + In CF, is the type of ffi?
   + Is there a limitation of the HOL system there in terms of modularity that Coq wouldn't have?


- The use of coercions can make definitions significantly easier to read,
   although some additional mental effort might be needed here and there
   (in which case being explicit about the coercions is always an option).
   I would encourage using coercions in any human-written Coq semantics.

  + Yes, happy to use coercions.
  + Translation from Lem does not need to care.


- The use of "implicit types" makes definitions significantly easier
   to read. However, it requires a naming convention whereby to each type
   is associated a prefix for variable names of these types. If we begin
   modifying names of bound variables, then how are we going to easily
   keep track of the correspondance between cakeml semantics and Coq
   semantics? One option is to rename cakeml variables, but that might
   be too intrusive. Another option is to keep a table of renamings, and
   perform (semi-)automatically the renamings, somehow. It seems that the
   easiest way is to use Coq-friendly appropriate names in the human-written
   Coq semantics, and stick to CakeML names in the generated Coq material.

   + Yes, happy to use implicit types.
   + Lem features a renaming system, we could exploit it further if needed
  to suit the required naming conventions, if we feel the need for that.


- More generally, it is possible/desirable for the Coq semantics to use
   exactly the same constructor and function names as in HOL?
   Can Lem be instrumented to deal with renamings where necessary/desirable?

   + Let's try to keep the same name wherever possible.


Alternative semantics
=====================

-  Let's suppose that I define a "Coq semantics covering only a subset of
   the CakeML language features". Let's suppose that I develop a program
   verification infrastructure for this fragment. What theorem do I need
   to establish to relate the "semantics for the subset" with the "semantics
   for the whole CakeML semantics" in order to be able to conclude anything
   meaningful about the verified compilation of my verified programs?

   In particular, I'd like to consider a language without exceptions nor I/O.
   Concretely, if I specify a module w.r.t. a simplified semantics without I/O,
   could I automatically lift my specifications to the general semantics
   with I/O?

   + tricky with higher-order functions exposed as libraries
     but might work for full programs
   + in which direction do we need to prove the inclusion between the semantics?
   + sometimes having simplified "proof rules" would be sufficient, but this does
     not allow hiding ffi state and exceptions altogether from the client, does it?


-  Is it possible to consider a functional semantics that avoid mixing some
   type-checking with the evaluation? Under the assumption that the program
   is well-typed, a number of tests should not be necessary. (For exampe,
   [allDistinct (pat_bindings p [])] or [lit_same_type l l'] should hold by
   type-checking.)

   On the one hand, CakeML's approach provides a semantics that holds
   (I assume) independently of the definition of types, and it might make
   some proof easiers. On the other hand, these facts somewhat pollute the
   semantics.

   + TJ confirms that the checks pollutes a lot the Coq semantics, we don't want them.
   + At some point, TJ started assuming well-typed code to remove the checks.

- Typechecking
   + CakeML has an executable typechecker, so we should not need one in Coq.
     All we need is a type system definition in Coq. And it might not even be needed
     for all applications.
   + Next thing to try: translate the type system def from Lem to Coq.
   + Open question for CakeML devs: would it make sense to have a Lem semantics that
     does not include the type-related checks? This semantics could be proved equivalent
     to the current one.


Helper definitions
=============

- There are many auxiliary definitions. We want to write a big step relational semantics by hand
   and relate it to the Lem semantics

- We might need a few commits on Lem at some point, to fix a few broken things or tweak it to our needs.

- Quentin will try to provide missing Lem definitions and Coq bindings.

- Arthur will look at TJ's definitions and try to simplify them using non-constructive tricks.

- There are missing primitive operations, they can be added later, nothing urgent.
